The theme of this month’s program
is “Make Wise Decisions.”
And our discussion is based on Job 34:11.
Let’s read that together:
“For he [Jehovah] will reward a man
“according to what he does
and bring upon him
the consequences of his ways.”
As highlighted in this scripture,
our actions are very important.
And our actions are usually the result
of decisions we make.
Some decisions are made
after a lot of serious thought.
Others, though, are made very quickly.
But no matter how much thought
goes into making a decision,
we need to recognize this basic fact:
Wise decisions bring positive rewards,
and wrong decisions can result
in very negative consequences.
Of course, all of us
want to make wise decisions.
But what are wise decisions?
Wise decisions are those
that please our heavenly Father, Jehovah.
Most of us have already made
some very good decisions.
These include the big decisions in life,
such as dedicating ourselves to Jehovah
and getting baptized
and deciding not to become involved
in the religious and political disputes
of this world.
No doubt,
before we made those major decisions,
we spent a lot of time praying about them
and seeking Jehovah’s direction.
And we’ve seen his blessing in our lives
because of these right decisions.
In this program, though,
we won’t be discussing such major decisions.
Rather, we’ll focus on decisions
that may be viewed by some as minor.
However, some of these
can lead to very serious consequences.
First, we’ll consider a Bible example
of a person who served Jehovah
and yet made some wrong decisions
along the way.
We’ll analyze
what caused this faithful servant
to make these wrong decisions.
Then we’ll consider what we need to do
in order to make wise decisions.
Finally, we’ll consider what we need to do
if we realize we’ve already made
an unwise decision.
So to start, let’s discuss
a faithful servant of Jehovah
who made some unwise decisions.
The example we have in mind
is that of King Jehoshaphat.
What was Jehovah’s view
of King Jehoshaphat?
Let’s see the answer
at 2 Chronicles chapter 17
and verses 3 and 4:
“Jehovah continued with Jehoshaphat
“because he walked
in the former ways of his forefather David
“and did not search for the Baals.
“For he searched for the God of his father
“and followed his commandment
and not the practices of Israel.”
That sounds like a wonderful commendation,
doesn’t it?
Yes, Jehoshaphat was a faithful king.
He made the wise decision
to worship Jehovah.
But even so,
he still made
some very unwise decisions.
Let’s read
about one of those unwise decisions
at 2 Chronicles 18:1:
“Jehoshaphat had riches
and glory in abundance,
but he made a marriage alliance with Ahab.”
Yes, he made his son
marry Ahab’s daughter Athaliah.
Now, that was a very unwise decision.
Why?
Because Ahab had built a temple for Baal
and had even employed 850 false prophets.
Ahab was also married
to wicked Queen Jezebel.
Who would want their child
to marry into such a bad family?
What was Jehoshaphat thinking?
Why did he arrange for this marriage?
Perhaps he wanted to reunite the 12 tribes,
or he may have had some political
and commercial motives
for wanting to have Ahab as an ally.
Even though we don’t know
for sure the reason,
we do know there were consequences.
Because of this close relationship with Ahab,
Jehoshaphat felt obligated to support Ahab
in a war against the Syrians.
However, this led
to yet another unwise decision.
As they were preparing for this battle,
Jehoshaphat asked for direction
from one of Jehovah’s prophets.
Ahab, though, expressed
his hatred for the prophet
and, after hearing the prophet’s message,
had him thrown into prison.
At that point,
it was decision time for Jehoshaphat.
What did he decide to do?
Although he initially disagreed with Ahab,
he eventually joined him in the battle.
Jehoshaphat disregarded
the warning from Jehovah.
But then this led him
to still another unwise decision
—this time an incredibly foolish decision.
What happened?
Jehovah’s prophet had foretold
that the Israelites would lose
their shepherd, or king, in battle.
So Ahab said that he would disguise himself
and not enter the battle dressed as a king.
He then said that Jehoshaphat
should still dress like a king.
Now, just think about that for a moment.
Ahab was basically saying,
‘You go out into battle
with a target on your back,
and I’ll hide in disguise.’
Really?
Jehoshaphat’s decision to agree to do that
was not only unwise but also foolish.
It nearly cost him his life.
So why would he do that?
Insight on the Scriptures  says
that perhaps Jehoshaphat
didn’t want “to go back
on his original promise to accompany Ahab.”
So maybe he would have lost face
if he backed out
of the agreement at that point.
Although Jehoshaphat did survive the battle,
Jehovah sent another prophet to him
to say what’s recorded at 2 Chronicles 19:2:
“Is it the wicked you should be helping,
“and is it those
who hate Jehovah you should love?
Because of this the indignation
of Jehovah is against you.”
Although Jehovah acknowledged
the good things
that Jehoshaphat had accomplished
in other aspects of his life,
Jehoshaphat clearly made
some very unwise decisions.
What lessons do we learn
from Jehoshaphat’s wrong decisions?
Lesson 1:
Just because we’ve done
many good things in Jehovah’s service
doesn’t mean
that we’ll always make wise decisions.
Lesson 2:
Making friendships with those
who hate Jehovah
can put us under pressure
to make other unwise decisions.
Lesson 3:
Even though
we may seek Jehovah’s direction,
we must follow it
if we want to make wise decisions.
Lesson 4:
If we realize
that we’ve made an unwise decision,
don’t keep going in the same course.
Stop and change direction.
These lessons can be summarized
in the words of Proverbs 22:3.
There we’re told:
“The shrewd one sees the danger
and conceals himself,
“but the inexperienced keep right on going
and suffer the consequences.”
Yes, we need to see
the possible consequences of wrong decisions
and then take action to avoid them.
What were some of the consequences
of Jehoshaphat’s unwise decisions?
It nearly cost him his life.
His oldest son died an apostate.
And later, his daughter-in-law Athaliah
killed all the heirs to the throne
except one baby
and set herself up as queen of Judah.
But you might be thinking,
‘Still, Jehovah viewed Jehoshaphat
as a good king.’
Yes, he did.
And it’s encouraging for us to know
that even if we have made
some unwise decisions,
it’s possible that Jehovah
may still view us as his faithful servants.
Does that mean, then,
that our decisions are not so important?
The Watchtower  back in 1980
made this interesting comparison.
It used an illustration of two ship captains.
One skillfully maneuvered his ship
through a storm,
bringing the vessel
and his crew safely to shore.
But the other captain made unwise decisions,
and because of that,
he experienced shipwreck
during the same storm, saving only his life.
While both captains escaped with their lives,
the one whose ship remained intact
would certainly enjoy
greater happiness and honor, wouldn’t he?
It’s obvious
which captain Jehoshaphat was like.
Unlike Jehoshaphat,
surely we’d prefer
to be like the successful captain
—the one whose ship remained intact.
How can we make sure
that we are like the successful captain?
Back in 2011, the April Watchtower
had a special chart
entitled “Steps to Making Good Decisions.”
It listed these steps
in making wise decisions:
(1) Avoid being presumptuous.
(2) Do research.
(3) Pray for wisdom.
(4) Make the decision.
(5) Implement the decision.
But then there was an additional step:
(6) Review and adjust.
Why is step 6 listed?
Well, from time to time,
we need to review decisions
we’ve already made.
As we do so, perhaps we’ll come to realize
that some of them
were not the best decisions.
Can you still be like the successful captain?
Yes, you can!
How?
If you courageously make
the needed adjustments.
We must acknowledge that not all decisions
work out exactly as we had planned.
As Ecclesiastes 9:11 reminds us,
“time and unexpected events
overtake [us] all.”
So, what should we do if that’s the case?
The same Watchtower  of 2011
answers that question for us.
After saying that Jehovah expects us
to live up to such decisions
as our dedication and our marriage vows,
it went on to say:
“Most decisions, though, are less weighty.
“A wise person will from time to time
“review the decisions he has made.
“He will not let pride or stubbornness
“prevent him from adjusting
“or even reversing a decision.
“His prime concern is to make sure
that his life course continues to honor God.”
Thinking back
to the illustration of the two captains,
at times they may need
to reverse a former unwise decision.
That happened
during a hurricane back in 1889.
The captain of the British ship Calliope
was anchored in the harbor
in Apia, Western Samoa,
when a hurricane started blowing.
Initially, he decided,
like all the other captains in the harbor,
to weather the storm where he was.
But as the waves grew in height
and the dangers increased,
the captain realized
he had made the wrong decision.
What did he do?
He courageously reversed his decision
and headed out to open sea.
It was difficult, but ultimately
he saved himself,
his ship, and the 250 sailors on board.
This bold act of courage
entered him into the annals of naval history.
To be like that courageous captain,
at times we need
to prayerfully reexamine our past decisions.
These could be decisions
about our employment,
entertainment, education,
or even where we live.
When we made the original decisions,
they may have seemed wise to us.
But do they still seem that way now?
If we see the dangerous winds
of bad consequences
and the frightening
waves of disaster approaching
because our decisions were not
completely in harmony with Jehovah’s will,
what should we do?
Be like the wise captain.
Don’t worry about losing face.
Be courageous!
Pray for Jehovah’s help,
and then take bold action.
Make the changes you need to make
in order to continue to please Jehovah.
In this way, you’ll make the wise decision
—the one that leads to success,
the one that Jehovah will bless.